I stare down at my shoes, watching as a fine layer of
ash settles on the worn leather. This is where the bed I
shared with my sister, Prim, stood. Over there was the
kitchen table. The bricks of the chimney, which collapsed in
a charred heap, provide a point of reference for the rest of
the house. How else could I orient myself in this sea of
gray?
Almost nothing remains of District 12. A month ago,
the Capitol's firebombs obliterated the poor coal miners'
houses in the Seam, the shops in the town, even the Justice
Building. The only area that escaped incineration was the
Victor's Village. I don't know why exactly. Perhaps so
anyone forced to come here on Capitol business would
have somewhere decent to stay. The odd reporter. A
committee assessing the condition of the coal mines. A
squad of Peacekeepers checking for returning refugees.
But no one is returning except me. And that's only for a
brief visit. The authorities in District 13 were against my
coming back. They viewed it as a costly and pointless
venture, given that at least a dozen invisible hovercraft are
circling overhead for my protection and there's no
intelligence to be gained. I had to see it, though. So much
so that I made it a condition of my cooperating with any of
their plans.
Finally, Plutarch Heavensbee, the Head Gamemaker
who had organized the rebels in the Capitol, threw up his
hands. "Let her go. Better to waste a day than another
month. Maybe a little tour of Twelve is just what she needs
to convince her we're on the same side."
The same side. A pain stabs my left temple and I
press my hand against it. Right on the spot where Johanna
Mason hit me with the coil of wire. The memories swirl as I
try to sort out what is true and what is false. What series of
events led me to be standing in the ruins of my city? This is
hard because the effects of the concussion she gave me
haven't completely subsided and my thoughts still have a
tendency to jumble together. Also, the drugs they use to
control my pain and mood sometimes make me see things.
I guess. I'm still not entirely convinced that I was
hallucinating the night the floor of my hospital room
transformed into a carpet of writhing snakes.
I use a technique one of the doctors suggested. I start
with the simplest things I know to be true and work toward
the more complicated. The list begins to roll in my head....
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. I was in the Hunger Games. I
escaped. The Capitol hates me. Peeta was taken
prisoner. He is thought to be dead. Most likely he is dead.
It is probably best if he is dead....
"Katniss. Should I come down?" My best friend Gale's
voice reaches me through the headset the rebels insisted I
wear. He's up in a hovercraft, watching me carefully, ready
to swoop in if anything goes amiss. I realize I'm crouched
down now, elbows on my thighs, my head braced between
my hands. I must look on the verge of some kind of
breakdown. This won't do. Not when they're finally weaning
me off the medication.
I straighten up and wave his offer away. "No. I'm fine."
To reinforce this, I begin to move away from my old house
and in toward the town. Gale asked to be dropped off in 12
with me, but he didn't force the issue when I refused his
company. He understands I don't want anyone with me
today. Not even him. Some walks you have to take alone.
The summer's been scorching hot and dry as a bone.
There's been next to no rain to disturb the piles of ash left
by the attack. They shift here and there, in reaction to my
footsteps. No breeze to scatter them. I keep my eyes on
what I remember as the road, because when I first landed in
the Meadow, I wasn't careful and I walked right into a rock.
Only it wasn't a rock--it was someone's skull. It rolled over
and over and landed faceup, and for a long time I couldn't
stop looking at the teeth, wondering whose they were,
thinking of how mine would probably look the same way
under similar circumstances.
I stick to the road out of habit, but it's a bad choice,
because it's full of the remains of those who tried to flee.
Some were incinerated entirely. But others, probably
overcome with smoke, escaped the worst of the flames and
now lie reeking in various states of decomposition, carrion
for scavengers, blanketed by flies. I killed you, I think as I
pass a pile. And you. And you.
Because I did. It was my arrow, aimed at the chink in
the force field surrounding the arena, that brought on this
firestorm of retribution. That sent the whole country of
Panem into chaos.
In my head I hear President Snow's words, spoken the
morning I was to begin the Victory Tour. "Katniss
Everdeen, the girl who was on fire, you have provided a
spark that, left unattended, may grow to an inferno that
destroys Panem." It turns out he wasn't exaggerating or
simply trying to scare me. He was, perhaps, genuinely
attempting to enlist my help. But I had already set
something in motion that I had no ability to control.
Burning. Still burning, I think numbly. The fires at the
coal mines belch black smoke in the distance. There's no
one left to care, though. More than ninety percent of the
district's population is dead. The remaining eight hundred
or so are refugees in District 13--which, as far as I'm
concerned, is the same thing as being homeless forever.
I know I shouldn't think that; I know I should be grateful
for the way we have been welcomed. Sick, wounded,
starving, and empty-handed. Still, I can never get around
the fact that District 13 was instrumental in 12's destruction.
This doesn't absolve me of blame--there's plenty of blame
to go around. But without them, I would not have been part
of a larger plot to overthrow the Capitol or had the
wherewithal to do it.
The citizens of District 12 had no organized resistance
movement of their own. No say in any of this. They only had
the misfortune to have me. Some survivors think it's good
luck, though, to be free of District 12 at last. To have
escaped the endless hunger and oppression, the perilous
mines, the lash of our final Head Peacekeeper, Romulus
Thread. To have a new home at all is seen as a wonder
since, up until a short time ago, we hadn't even known that
District 13 still existed.
The credit for the survivors' escape has landed
squarely on Gale's shoulders, although he's loath to accept
it. As soon as the Quarter Quell was over--as soon as I had
been lifted from the arena--the electricity in District 12 was
cut, the televisions went black, and the Seam became so
silent, people could hear one another's heartbeats. No one
did anything to protest or celebrate what had happened in
the arena. Yet within fifteen minutes, the sky was filled with
hoverplanes and the bombs were raining down.
It was Gale who thought of the Meadow, one of the few
places not filled with old wooden homes embedded with
coal dust. He herded those he could in its direction,
including my mother and Prim. He formed the team that
pulled down the fence--now just a harmless chain-link
barrier, with the electricity off--and led the people into the
woods. He took them to the only place he could think of, the
lake my father had shown me as a child. And it was from
there they watched the distant flames eat up everything they
knew in the world.
By dawn the bombers were long gone, the fires dying,
the final stragglers rounded up. My mother and Prim had
set up a medical area for the injured and were attempting
to treat them with whatever they could glean from the
woods. Gale had two sets of bows and arrows, one hunting
knife, one fishing net, and over eight hundred terrified
people to feed. With the help of those who were ablebodied,
they managed for three days. And that's when the
hovercraft unexpectedly arrived to evacuate them to District
13, where there were more than enough clean, white living
compartments, plenty of clothing, and three meals a day.
The compartments had the disadvantage of being
underground, the clothing was identical, and the food was
relatively tasteless, but for the refugees of 12, these were
minor considerations. They were safe. They were being
cared for. They were alive and eagerly welcomed.
This enthusiasm was interpreted as kindness. But a
man named Dalton, a District 10 refugee who'd made it to
13 on foot a few years ago, leaked the real motive to me.
"They need you. Me. They need us all. Awhile back, there
was some sort of pox epidemic that killed a bunch of them
and left a lot more infertile. New breeding stock. That's how
they see us." Back in 10, he'd worked on one of the beef
ranches, maintaining the genetic diversity of the herd with
the implantation of long-frozen cow embryos. He's very
likely right about 13, because there don't seem to be nearly
enough kids around. But so what? We're not being kept in
pens, we're being trained for work, the children are being
educated. Those over fourteen have been given entry-level
ranks in the military and are addressed respectfully as
"Soldier." Every single refugee was granted automatic
citizenship by the authorities of 13.
Still, I hate them. But, of course, I hate almost
everybody now. Myself more than anyone.
The surface beneath my feet hardens, and under the
carpet of ash, I feel the paving stones of the square. Around
the perimeter is a shallow border of refuse where the shops
stood. A heap of blackened rubble has replaced the
Justice Building. I walk to the approximate site of the
bakery Peeta's family owned. Nothing much left but the
melted lump of the oven. Peeta's parents, his two older
brothers--none of them made it to 13. Fewer than a dozen
of what passed for District 12's well-to-do escaped the fire.
Peeta would have nothing to come home to, anyway.
Except me...
I back away from the bakery and bump into something,
lose my balance, and find myself sitting on a hunk of sunheated
metal. I puzzle over what it might have been, then
remember Thread's recent renovations of the square.
Stocks, whipping posts, and this, the remains of the
gallows. Bad. This is bad. It brings on the flood of images
that torments me, awake or asleep. Peeta being tortured--
drowned, burned, lacerated, shocked, maimed, beaten--as
the Capitol tries to get information about the rebellion that
he doesn't know. I squeeze my eyes shut and try to reach
for him across the hundreds and hundreds of miles, to send
my thoughts into his mind, to let him know he is not alone.
But he is. And I can't help him.
Running. Away from the square and to the one place
the fire did not destroy. I pass the wreckage of the mayor's
house, where my friend Madge lived. No word of her or her
family. Were they evacuated to the Capitol because of her
father's position, or left to the flames? Ashes billow up
around me, and I pull the hem of my shirt up over my mouth.
It's not wondering what I breathe in, but who, that threatens
to choke me.
The grass has been scorched and the gray snow fell
here as well, but the twelve fine houses of the Victor's
Village are unscathed. I bolt into the house I lived in for the
past year, slam the door closed, and lean back against it.
The place seems untouched. Clean. Eerily quiet. Why did I
come back to 12? How can this visit help me answer the
question I can't escape?
"What am I going to do?" I whisper to the walls.
Because I really don't know.
